1. Mol Aspects Med. 2022 Oct;87:100988. doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2021.100988. Epub 2021 
Jul 6.

Perinatal effects of persistent organic pollutants on thyroid hormone 
concentration in placenta and breastmilk.

De Angelis M(1), Schramm KW(2).

Author information:
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum München-German Research Center for Environmental Health 
(GmbH), Molecular EXposomics, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, 85764, Neuherberg, 
Germany. Electronic address: meri.deangelis@helmholtz-muenchen.de.
(2)Helmholtz Zentrum München-German Research Center for Environmental Health 
(GmbH), Molecular EXposomics, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, 85764, Neuherberg, 
Germany; Technical University of Munich, Department für Biowissenschaftliche 
Grundlagen, 85350, Freising, Germany. Electronic address: 
schramm@helmholtz-muenchen.de.

Thyroid hormones (TH) are known to play a critical role in regulating many 
biological processes including growth and development, energy homeostasis, 
thermogenesis, lipolysis and metabolism of cholesterol. Severe TH deficiency 
especially during fetal development results in cretinism, but can also lead to 
an imbalance in metabolism with, among others, an alteration in body weight 
composition. Over the past two decades, increasing evidence has shown that 
certain persistent organic pollutants (POP) can interfere with the endocrine 
system. These POP referred to as "endocrine disrupting chemicals" are widely 
present in the environment and populations are exposed globally. Moreover, 
epidemiological studies have shown that a particularly sensitive period is the 
pre- and postnatal time. Indeed, perinatal exposure to such chemicals could lead 
to the onset diseases in later life. It is known, that, maternal thyroid 
hormones are transported by the placenta to the fetus from 6 weeks of gestation 
and it seems that during the first trimester, and part of the second, the fetus 
is entirely dependent on maternal TH supply for its development. Interferences 
in the TH-network as a consequence of the exposure to such pollutants could 
cause variations in TH concentration. Only small changes in maternal thyroid 
hormone levels in early stages of pregnancy can influence fetal neurological and 
cardiovascular development, as well as according to recent studies, have effect 
on childhood body composition. With this review, we will report the most recent 
and important studies concerning the association between thyroid hormone 
concentration and POP levels measured during the perinatal period. We will 
mostly focus on the data recently reported on placenta and breastmilk as main 
sources for understanding the potential consequences of exposure. The possible 
link between exposure to pollutants, TH dysregulation and possible adverse 
outcome will also be briefly discussed. From our literature search, several 
studies support the hypothesis that pre- and postnatal exposure to different 
pollutants might play a role in causing variation in thyroid hormone 
concentration. However, few research papers have so far studied the relationship 
linking exposure to pollutants, TH concentration and possible health 
consequences. Therefore, this review highlights the need for further research in 
this direction.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mam.2021.100988
PMID: 34238594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Sci Total Environ. 2022 Aug 1;832:155084. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.155084. 
Epub 2022 Apr 6.

Persistent organic pollutants in foods, their interplay with gut microbiota and 
resultant toxicity.

Popli S(1), Badgujar PC(2), Agarwal T(3), Bhushan B(1), Mishra V(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic and Applied Sciences, National Institute of Food 
Technology Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli, Sonepat, Haryana 131 028, 
India.
(2)Department of Food Science and Technology, National Institute of Food 
Technology Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli, Sonepat, Haryana 131 028, 
India. Electronic address: prarabdh.badgujar@niftem.ac.in.
(3)Department of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences, National Institute of 
Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli, Sonepat, Haryana 131 
028, India.
(4)Department of Basic and Applied Sciences, National Institute of Food 
Technology Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli, Sonepat, Haryana 131 028, 
India. Electronic address: vijpaarth@gmail.com.

Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) have become immensely prevalent in the 
environment as a result of their unique chemical properties (persistent, 
semi-volatile and bioaccumulative nature). Their occurrence in the soil, water 
and subsequently in food has become a matter of concern. With food being one of 
the major sources of exposure, the detrimental impact of these chemicals on the 
gut microbiome is inevitable. The gut microbiome is considered as an important 
integrant for human health. It participates in various physiological, 
biochemical and immunological activities; thus, affects the metabolism and 
physiology of the host. A myriad of studies have corroborated an association 
between POP-induced gut microbial dysbiosis and prevalence of disorders. For 
instance, ingestion of polychlorinated biphenyls, polybrominated diphenyl ethers 
or organochlorine pesticides influenced bile acid metabolism via alteration of 
bile salt hydrolase activity of Lactobacillus, Clostridium or Bacteroides genus. 
At the same time, some chemicals such as DDE have the potential to elevate 
Proteobacteria and Firmicutes/Bacteriodetes ratio influencing their metabolic 
activity leading to enhanced short-chain fatty acid synthesis, ensuing obesity 
or a pre-diabetic state. This review highlights the impact of POPs exposure on 
the gut microbiota composition and metabolic activity, along with an account of 
its corresponding consequences on the host physiology. The critical role of gut 
microbiota in impeding the POPs excretion out of the body resulting in their 
prolonged exposure and consequently, enhanced degree of toxicity is also 
emphasized.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.155084
PMID: 35395291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Authors 
declare no conflict of interest.


3. J Environ Manage. 2019 May 1;237:519-525. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.02.102. 
Epub 2019 Feb 28.

A review of toxicity induced by persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and 
endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.

Chen H(1), Wang C(2), Li H(3), Ma R(1), Yu Z(1), Li L(1), Xiang M(1), Chen X(1), 
Hua X(4), Yu Y(5).

Author information:
(1)State Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution 
Health Risk Assessment, South China Institute of Environmental Sciences, 
Ministry of Environmental Protection, Guangzhou, 510655, China.
(2)State Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Environmental Risk 
Assessment and Control on Chemical Process, School of Resources and 
Environmental Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, 
Shanghai, 200237, PR China.
(3)Institute for Environmental Pollution and Health, School of Environmental and 
Chemical Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 200444, PR China. 
Electronic address: huili@ecust.edu.cn.
(4)State Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution 
Health Risk Assessment, South China Institute of Environmental Sciences, 
Ministry of Environmental Protection, Guangzhou, 510655, China; School of 
Environmental and Municipal Engineering, Lanzhou Jiaotong University, Lanzhou, 
730070, China.
(5)State Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution 
Health Risk Assessment, South China Institute of Environmental Sciences, 
Ministry of Environmental Protection, Guangzhou, 510655, China. Electronic 
address: yuyunjiang@scies.org.

Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and endocrine disrupting compounds (EDCs) 
are almost ubiquitous in synthetic and natural sources; however these 
contaminants adversely impact ecosystems and humans. Owing to their potential 
toxicity, concerns have been raised about the effects of POPs and EDCs on 
ecological and human health. Therefore, toxicity evaluation and mechanisms 
actions of these contaminants are of great interest. The nematode Caenorhabditis 
elegans (C. elegans), an excellent model animal for environmental toxicology 
research, has been used widely for toxicity studies of POPs or EDCs from the 
whole-animal level to the single-cell level. In this review, we have discussed 
the toxicity of specific POPs or EDCs after acute, chronic, and 
multigenerational exposure in C. elegans. We have also introduced a discussion 
of the toxicological mechanisms of these compounds in C. elegans, with respect 
to oxidative stress, cell apoptosis, and the insulin/IGF-1 signaling pathway. 
Finally, we raised considered the perspectives and challenges of the toxicity 
assessments, multigenerational toxicity, and toxicological mechanisms.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.02.102
PMID: 30825784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2022 May 1;322(5):E383-E413. doi: 
10.1152/ajpendo.00358.2021. Epub 2022 Feb 14.

Persistent organic pollutants and β-cell toxicity: a comprehensive review.

Hoyeck MP(1), Matteo G(1)(2)(3), MacFarlane EM(1), Perera I(1), Bruin JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Institute of Biochemistry, Carleton University, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Environmental Health Science and Research Bureau, Health Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada.

Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are a diverse family of contaminants that 
show widespread global dispersion and bioaccumulation. Humans are continuously 
exposed to POPs through diet, air particles, and household and commercial 
products; POPs are consistently detected in human tissues, including the 
pancreas. Epidemiological studies show a modest but consistent correlation 
between exposure to POPs and increased diabetes risk. The goal of this review is 
to provide an overview of epidemiological evidence and an in-depth evaluation of 
the in vivo and in vitro evidence that POPs cause β-cell toxicity. We review 
evidence for six classes of POPs: dioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 
organochlorine pesticides (OCPs), organophosphate pesticides (OPPs), flame 
retardants, and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). The available data 
provide convincing evidence implicating POPs as a contributing factor driving 
impaired glucose homeostasis, β-cell dysfunction, and altered metabolic and 
oxidative stress pathways in islets. These findings support epidemiological data 
showing that POPs increase diabetes risk and emphasize the need to consider the 
endocrine pancreas in toxicity assessments. Our review also highlights 
significant gaps in the literature assessing islet-specific endpoints after both 
in vivo and in vitro POP exposure. In addition, most rodent studies do not 
consider the impact of biological sex or secondary metabolic stressors in 
mediating the effects of POPs on glucose homeostasis and β-cell function. We 
discuss key gaps and limitations that should be assessed in future studies.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00358.2021
PMCID: PMC9394781
PMID: 35156417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.


5. Toxicology. 2023 Aug 1;494:153567. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2023.153567. Epub 2023 Jun 
1.

Effect of persistent organic pollutants in patients with ischemic stroke and all 
stroke: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Dev P(1), Chakravarty K(2), Pandey M(3), Ranjan R(4), Cyriac M(1), Mishra VN(1), 
Pathak A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Medical Science, Banaras Hindu 
University, Varanasi 221005, India.
(2)Department of Neurology, PGIMER, Chandigarh, india.
(3)Department of Surgical Oncology, Institute of Medical Science, Banaras Hindu 
University, Varanasi 221005, India.
(4)DST-Center for Interdisciplinary Mathematical Sciences, Banaras Hindu 
University, Varanasi, India.
(5)Department of Neurology, Institute of Medical Science, Banaras Hindu 
University, Varanasi 221005, India. Electronic address: 
abhishekpathakaiims@gmail.com.

The role of environmental contaminants and their association with stroke is 
still being determined. Association has been shown with air pollution, noise, 
and water pollution; however, the results are inconsistent across studies. A 
systematic review and meta-analysis of the effect of persistent organic 
pollutants (POP) in ischemic stroke patients were conducted; a comprehensive 
literature search was carried out until 30th June 2021 from different databases. 
The quality of all the articles which met our inclusion criteria was assessed 
using Newcastle-Ottawa scaling; five eligible studies were included in our 
systematic review. The most studied POP in ischemic stroke was polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs), and they have shown a trend for association with ischemic 
stroke. The study also revealed that living near a source of POPs contamination 
constitutes a risk of exposure and an increased risk of ischemic stroke. 
Although our study provides a strong positive association of POPs with ischemic 
stroke, more extensive studies must be conducted to prove the association.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tox.2023.153567
PMID: 37268249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


6. Rev Environ Health. 2022 May 5;38(3):401-408. doi: 10.1515/reveh-2021-0105. 
Print 2023 Sep 26.

Determination of safe levels of persistent organic pollutants in toxicology and 
epidemiology.

Muir T(1), Michalek JE(2), Palmer RF(3).

Author information:
(1)Environment Canada, 70 Townsend Ave, Burlington, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Population Health Sciences, UT Health San Antonio, San Antonio 
TX, USA.
(3)Department of Family and Community Medicine, UT Health San Antonio, San 
Antonio TX, USA.

We reviewed published manuscripts from toxicology and epidemiology reporting 
harmful health effects and doses of persistent organic pollutants (POPs), 
published between 2000 and 2021. We found 42 in vitro, 32 in vivo, and 74 
epidemiological studies and abstracted the dose associated with harm in a common 
Molar unit. We hypothesized that the dose associated with harm would vary 
between animal and human studies. To test this hypothesis, for each of several 
POPs, we assessed the significance of variation in the dose associated with a 
harmful effect [categorized as non-thyroid endocrine (NTE), developmental 
neurotoxicity (DNT), and Thyroid] with study type (in vitro, in vivo, and 
Epidemiology) using a linear model after adjustment for basis (lipid weight, wet 
weight). We created a Calculated Safety Factor (CSF) defined as the toxicology 
dose divided by epidemiology dose needed to exhibit significant harm. 
Significant differences were found between study types ranging from <1 to 5.0 
orders of magnitude in the dose associated with harm. Our CSFs in lipid weight 
varied from 12.4 (95% confidence interval (CI) 3.3, 47) for NTE effects in 
Epidemiology relative to in vivo studies to 6,244 (95% CI 2510, 15530) for DNT 
effects in Epidemiology relative to in vitro in wet weight representing 12.4 to 
6.2 thousand-fold more sensitivity in people relative to animals, and 
mechanistic models, respectively. In lipid weight, all CSF 95% CI lower bounds 
across effect categories were less than 6.5. CIs for CSFs ranged from less than 
one to four orders of magnitude for in vivo, and two to five orders of magnitude 
for in vitro vs. Epidemiology. A global CSF for all Epidemiology vs. all 
Toxicology was 104.6 (95% CI 72 to 152), significant at p<0.001.

© 2022 Tom Muir et al., published by De Gruyter, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/reveh-2021-0105
PMID: 35506713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Rev Environ Health. 2021 Apr 15;37(1):61-70. doi: 10.1515/reveh-2020-0113. Print 
2022 Mar 28.

Prenatal exposure to persistent organic pollutants as a risk factor of offspring 
metabolic syndrome development during childhood.

González MC(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, University at Albany, Rensselaer, NY, USA.

Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) are exogenous, artificially made chemicals 
that can disrupt the biological system of individuals and animals. POPs 
encompass a variety of chemicals including, dioxins, organochlorines (OCs), 
polychlorinated biphenyl (PCBs), and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) that 
contain a long half-life and highly resistant to biodegradation. These 
environmental pollutants accumulate over time in adipose tissues of living 
organisms and alter various insulin function-related genes. Childhood Metabolic 
Syndrome (MetS) consists of multiple cardiovascular risk factors, insulin 
function being one of them. Over the years, the incidence of the syndrome has 
increased dramatically. It is imperative to explore the role of persistent 
organic pollutants in the development of Childhood Metabolic Syndrome. Some 
epidemiological studies have reported an association between prenatal exposure 
to POPs and offspring MetS development throughout childhood. These findings have 
been replicated in animal studies in which these pollutants exercise negative 
health outcomes such as obesity and increased waist circumference. This review 
discusses the role of prenatal exposure to POPs among offspring who develop MetS 
in childhood, the latest research on the MetS concept, epidemiological and 
experimental findings on MetS, and the POPs modes of action. This literature 
review identified consistent research results on this topic. Even though the 
studies in this review had many strengths, one major weakness was the usage of 
different combinations of MetS criteria to measure the outcomes. These findings 
elucidate the urgent need to solidify the pediatric MetS definition. An accurate 
definition will permit scientists to measure the MetS as a health outcome 
properly and allow clinicians to diagnose pediatric MetS and provide 
individualized treatment appropriately.

© 2021 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/reveh-2020-0113
PMID: 33866704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Sci Total Environ. 2021 Jan 20;753:142028. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142028. 
Epub 2020 Aug 29.

Levels and profiles of persistent organic pollutants in breast milk in China and 
their potential health risks to breastfed infants: A review.

Hu L(1), Luo D(1), Wang L(1), Yu M(1), Zhao S(2), Wang Y(3), Mei S(4), Zhang 
G(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environment Health (Incubation), Key Laboratory of 
Environment and Health, Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Environment and 
Health (Wuhan), Ministry of Environmental Protection, School of Public Health, 
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, #13 
Hangkong Road, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry, Guangzhou Institute of 
Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510640, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Environment Health (Incubation), Key Laboratory of 
Environment and Health, Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Environment and 
Health (Wuhan), Ministry of Environmental Protection, School of Public Health, 
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, #13 
Hangkong Road, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, China; Department of Maternal and Child 
Health, School of Public Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Environment Health (Incubation), Key Laboratory of 
Environment and Health, Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Environment and 
Health (Wuhan), Ministry of Environmental Protection, School of Public Health, 
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, #13 
Hangkong Road, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, China. Electronic address: 
surongmei@hust.edu.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry, Guangzhou Institute of 
Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510640, China. Electronic 
address: zhanggan@gig.ac.cn.

Although some persistent organic pollutants (POPs) were prohibited or limited in 
use several decades ago, they are still frequently detected in the human body. 
The purpose of this study was to understand the levels and profiles of POPs in 
breast milk in China and assess their potential health risks among breastfed 
infants under six months of age. A literature review focused on China was 
performed for studies published from 2001 to 2020. The POP levels in breast milk 
along with other important variables were extracted, and then the average 
individual POP levels in breast milk were estimated. This review summarises the 
distribution of traditional and new POPs, including polychlorinated biphenyls 
(PCBs), organochlorine pesticides (OCPs), legacy brominated flame retardants 
(BFRs), perfluorinated compounds (PFCs), and chlorinated paraffins (CPs) and 
reported notably high levels of short-chain chlorinated paraffins and 
1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis (p-chlorophenyl) ethylene (p,p'-DDE) in breast milk. 
Although the levels of traditional POPs generally declined over time, especially 
p,p'-DDE and beta-hexachlorocyclohexane (β-HCH), women living in coastal areas, 
urban areas, and southern China still have a high body burden of certain POPs. 
In the present study, the estimated daily intake (EDI) of POPs through 
breastfeeding was used to evaluate the health risk for infants by comparing with 
acceptable levels. The findings suggested that infants born in coastal areas 
most likely suffered potential health risk from exposure to DDT, and the health 
risk of hexachlorobenzene (HCB) in infants in most nationwide regions remains a 
concern. More importantly, the EDI of PCBs for infants exceeds the safe limit on 
a national scale. Continuous surveillance of PCBs in breast milk is critical to 
evaluate the potential health effects on humans.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142028
PMID: 32906049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.


9. Environ Int. 2021 Jan;146:106224. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2020.106224. Epub 2020 
Nov 1.

A review of the transplacental transfer of persistent halogenated organic 
pollutants: Transfer characteristics, influential factors, and mechanisms.

Zhang X(1), Cheng X(1), Lei B(2), Zhang G(3), Bi Y(1), Yu Y(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai University, 
Shanghai 200444, PR China.
(2)School of Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai University, 
Shanghai 200444, PR China; Guangdong Key Laboratory of Environmental Catalysis 
and Health Risk Control, Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Environmental Catalysis and 
Pollution Control, School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Institute of 
Environmental Health and Pollution Control, Guangdong University of Technology, 
Guangzhou 510006, PR China.
(3)Department of Environmental Health, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Tropical Disease Research, School of Public Health, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou 510515, PR China.
(4)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Environmental Catalysis and Health Risk Control, 
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Environmental Catalysis and Pollution Control, 
School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Institute of Environmental 
Health and Pollution Control, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 
510006, PR China. Electronic address: yuyingxin@gdut.edu.cn.

Persistent halogenated organic pollutants (HOPs) are a class of toxic chemicals, 
which may have adverse effects on fetuses via transplacental transfer from their 
mothers. Here, we review reported internal exposure levels of various HOPs 
(organochlorinated pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls, polybrominated 
diphenyl ethers, short- and medium-chain chlorinated paraffins, and per- and 
poly-fluoroalkyl substances) in placenta, and both maternal and umbilical cord 
sera. We also present analyses of the transplacental transfer and placental 
distribution characteristics of each class of compounds, and discuss effects of 
several factors on the transfer and accumulation efficiencies of HOPs, as well 
as the main mechanisms of HOPs' transfer across the placental barrier. Reported 
compound-specific transplacental transfer efficiencies and distribution 
efficiencies, expressed as umbilical cord:maternal serum and placental:maternal 
serum concentration ratios (RCM and RPM, respectively), are summarized. Average 
published RCM values of the HOPs range from 0.24 to 3.08 (lipid-adjusted) and 
from 0.04 to 3.1 (based on wet weights), and are highest for 
perfluoroalkylcarboxylates (PFCAs) and tetrabromobisphenol A. Average published 
RPM values range from 0.14 to 1.02 (lipid-adjusted) and from 0.30 to 1.4 (based 
on wet weights). The broad RCM and RPM ranges may reflect effects of various 
factors, inter alia physicochemical properties of HOPs, metabolic capacities of 
mothers and fetuses, placental maturity, and differential expression of 
influx/efflux transporters in the placenta. Generally, HOPs' RCM values decline 
linearly with molecular size, and are curvilinearly related to solubility. 
Plasma protein binding affinity and the difference between maternal and fetal 
metabolic capacities may also affect some HOPs' transfer efficiencies. HOPs' 
molecular size may be influential. Transplacental transport of HOPs likely 
occurs mostly through passive diffusion, although influx/efflux transporters 
expressed on maternal and/or fetal sides of the placenta may also facilitate or 
hinder their transport. Overall, the review highlights clear gaps in our 
understanding of mechanisms involved in HOPs' transplacental transport.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2020.106224
PMID: 33137703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Environ Pollut. 2021 Jun 15;279:116929. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.116929. Epub 
2021 Mar 15.

Epigenetic changes by per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS).

Kim S(1), Thapar I(2), Brooks BW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Science, Baylor University, Waco, TX, 76706, USA; 
Institute of Biomedical Studies, Baylor University, Waco, TX, 76706, USA. 
Electronic address: sujin_kim@baylor.edu.
(2)Department of Environmental Science, Baylor University, Waco, TX, 76706, USA; 
Honors College, Baylor University, Waco, TX, 76706, USA.
(3)Department of Environmental Science, Baylor University, Waco, TX, 76706, USA; 
Institute of Biomedical Studies, Baylor University, Waco, TX, 76706, USA. 
Electronic address: bryan_brooks@baylor.edu.

Increasing studies are examining per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) 
induced toxicity and resulting health outcomes, including epigenetic 
modifications (e.g., DNA methylation, histone modification, microRNA 
expression). We critically reviewed current evidence from human epidemiological, 
in vitro, and animal studies, including mammalian and aquatic model organisms. 
Epidemiological studies identified the associations between perfluorooctane 
sulfonate (PFOS) or perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) exposure and epigenetic 
changes in both adult populations and birth cohorts. For in vitro studies, 
various cell types including neuroblasts, preadipocytes, and hepatocytes have 
been employed to understand epigenetic effects of PFAS. In studies with animal 
models, effects of early life exposure to PFAS have been examined using rodent 
models, and aquatic models (e.g., zebrafish) have been more frequently used in 
recent years. Several studies highlighted oxidative stress as a key mediator 
between epigenetic modification and health effects. Collectively, previous 
research clearly suggest involvement of epigenetic mechanisms in PFAS induced 
toxicity, though these efforts have primarily focused on specific PFASs (i.e. 
mainly PFOS and PFOA) or endpoints (i.e. cancer). Additional studies are 
necessary to define specific linkages among epigenetic mechanisms and related 
biomarkers or phenotypical changes. In addition, future research is also needed 
for understudied PFAS and complex mixtures. Studies of epigenetic effects 
elicited by individual PFAS and mixtures are needed within an adverse outcome 
pathways framework, which will advance an understanding of PFAS risks to public 
health and the environment, and support efforts to design less hazardous 
chemicals.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.116929
PMID: 33751946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.